hey y'all it's Jess welcome back to
roots and refuge farm today I am going
to do a video you guys have been asking
for today I'm going to talk to you about
properly pruning your tomato plants now
the first question you may have is why
would you want to prune your Tomatoes I
and the answer to that is it really just
depends on where and how you're growing
your garden now I prune my tomato plants
pretty heavily and for two reasons one
the main reason I live in Central
Arkansas where it is hot and humid
during the summer and Moisture is kind
of like the arch-nemesis of healthy
tomato plants if you've got a situation
where your leaves and your foliage is
staying wet where there's not enough
airflow it's just the recipe for disease
and fungus and then just kill your
plants entirely pruning just makes for
healthier plants and in that it makes
for a greater harvest the other thing is
is I do raise beds and so I like to
plant things pretty close together I
don't have the option of just putting
three and four feet between my tomato
plants which that's what a lot of people
do whenever they're growing in the
ground they just space them out a lot
further
but in raised beds obviously I'm having
to fill these with soil and so I want to
use this space as wisely as possible it
never fails whenever I start talking
about pruning somebody pipes up and says
well I've never proved my tomato plants
and I've always had a great harvest that
may be the case you may have no issues
with it whatsoever in that case more
power to you keep on keeping on let your
tomato plants Bush out like crazy that
just doesn't work where I live so if
you're here you've dealt with disease
you've dealt with the frustration of
losing your harvest early and you're
like well how do I pretty much many
plants this videos for you there are two
types of tomato plants there are in
determinants and determinants and you
may have seen those words and not fully
understood sometimes seed packages and
plant starts are not clearly labeled and
so this brings on some confusion most
tomato
that you're going to get to grow in your
garden they're going to be indeterminate
it's like most most of them are and if
they're labeled dwarf or mini dwarf or
bush those are going to be determinate
varieties and basically the difference
is is a determinate tomato it has a
determined level of growth genetically
in the plant it will have a determined
amount of blossoms a determined height
it doesn't just keep growing and growing
it grows to a certain point it sets its
certain amount of blossoms it grows its
fruit and then it stops an indeterminate
plant it keeps growing as long as you
keep the plant healthy and you continue
to offer the plant support it will
continue to grow I mean they can get 15
feet tall whenever people grow them like
in greenhouses with really really high
supports you are not going to prune
determinate tomato plants like I'm
showing you today let them Bush let them
have all their flowers that is how you
want to grow those today I'm talking
about pruning and this is always for
indeterminate variety because
essentially what we're going to be doing
with these plants is cutting off some of
the branches that would set fruit if
they were allowed to continue to grow so
if you have a determined amount of
blossoms and a determined amount of
fruit you don't want to lop off half of
it because you're going to be seriously
cutting into your harvest if you do that
however with an indeterminate plant we
go ahead and we sacrifice those branches
to keep the plant healthier longer
because in doing that you really do
extend your harvest in order to prune
your Tomatoes all you need is some like
garden snips pruners scissors whatever
doesn't have to be fancy it does need to
be relatively sharp and clean whenever
these little parts that I'm going to
show you to break off are small you can
pretty much pinch them off however when
they start to get bigger that gets
harder to do and just ripping at them
with your hands is going to more likely
damage your plants here we have a happy
little
tomato transplant as you can see here
there is a main stalk that goes all the
way up and these little branches that
come off these are the leaf branches and
if you'll see right here in the armpit
of this tomato plant very technical term
there this is this is called a sucker
now if allowed to grow each of these
suckers growing in the armpits of this
plant here's a little bigger one down
here these would grow into another stalk
like this which would eventually set off
flowers just like these and the flowers
would eventually become fruit so if
allowed to grow this plant would get
really really bushy with lots of big
strong stalks with lots of flowers and
lots of fruit which you think well
that's a great thing and the problem
with that is is that that cuts off the
airflow and harbors moisture and fungus
and therefore it can make for sick
plants now you can see here our plants
are close together and as they grow up
we attach them to these cattle panels so
I want to make sure that there's air
flow and the way we do that is that
we're going to prune this plant down to
this one main stem and we're not going
to allow it to grow a bunch of side
shoots the first thing that I'm going to
do is anywhere where these leaves are
touching the ground I'm going to come in
and cut those leaves off so there's
bottom a little bit I have that
completely clear that way there's no
splash back I'm not having any moisture
back on these plants you can even see
these leaves here because they were
touching the ground they've got a little
bit of insect damage bottom leaves get
sick first on tomato friends as my
plants grow and they reach the bottom of
this trellis I will actually trim every
single stem and leaf off of the bottom
like 20 inches everything that's below
this trellis will be completely clean
now obviously I can't do that now
because the entire plant is below the
trellis but as it continues to grow up
these bottom leaves they're going to get
longer and that means they're going to
touch the ground they're going to get
that splash back they'll start to curl
they might get brown
so as this plant gets taller and taller
I'll continue to cut off these bottom
leaves until there's nothing underneath
the bottom of this trellis but in the
meantime the main thing that I want to
deal with are these little suckers and
when they're really small it's easy to
come and just pinch them off okay and
you just come through and take all of
the suckers out of the armpit of this
plant so now see nothing growing between
here no leaves touching the ground so
when I very quickly come through and
prune my young plants it looks something
like this
cut off any of the lower branches that
are touching the ground pinch off the
little suckers and if you do this every
few days the growth won't get away from
you and you'll keep nicely pruned plants
that are really manageable but let's be
honest sometimes we don't get to the
garden every few days sometimes it rains
for a week or we have to go out of town
and we come back to massive growth then
what do we do
I've actually led a couple of tomato
plants down here go just to show you how
to deal with it if you aren't pruning
from the very beginning this plan is a
little bit older than the rest of mine
and I have purposely just completely not
pruned it so you can see here there
there are a lot of branches down here
towards the ground
and this bottom part has not been
cleared off but if you look right here
this is what happens to a sucker that is
allowed to develop do you see how it's
creating another stem that's almost as
big as this one and if you'll see here
here's another one where it has split
off pruning more established plants is
really more of an operation than working
on plants that have just tiny little
sprouts because when we cut off these
branches we're creating more of a wound
that this plant has to heal from and
it's also creating a larger opening
where infection could come in so it's
really important if you're going to be
pruning especially larger plants that
you do it when it's dry outside and not
in the middle of the day morning is best
evening works - I would not want to do
this right before it was about to rain a
bunch working on more established plants
like this sharp snips or scissors really
do make a big difference because if I
were just to take this branch and pull
it there's a much more chance of me
grabbing more of the skin creating a
tear breaking a main branch so I
definitely want to use my snips in this
situation so the first thing I'm going
to do is come in and cut off these lower
branches I want to cut off everything
that's touching the ground because as
you can see here these are kind of
already showing some holes in spots now
that that's done I'm going to
in and cut these suckers off the armpit
interestingly enough I can actually take
this and stick it in some water allowing
it to root and I could have myself at
this point what's called a clone this
would produce another tomato plant that
can be planted in the ground and that
will bear fruit if you want to multiply
the plants that you have save these
suckers and put them in some water to
root now here is a nice big sucker you
can see that this is already starting to
produce a second stem I'm going to go
ahead and cut this one off
however if you'll notice right here this
sucker kind of grew sort of connected to
this now I don't always do this but in
this situation where this plant is
developed enough that I think that I
could be possibly risking infection on
cutting this and the thing is I don't
really know which one of these was the
original main stalk I had to guess I
would say this one but I don't want to
risk cutting off the top of this plant
because that'll keep it from growing
taller I'm going to make a call in this
situation where there is a split right
here to leave both of these stalks that
means that this particular plant will
not be pruned to one main stalk it's
going to have this split it'll be a
little bit larger I don't want to do
that on all of them but sometimes I'm
willing to make an exception if I feel
like that's what's best for the plant
okay I'm gonna go ahead and look here
and pull off the small suckers higher up
on this plant and so that's it for
pruning this one now before too long
I'll come back and cut off these bottom
leaves once the plants a little bit
bigger you may have seen me just drop
these branches down in the bed I usually
come back through afterwards I grab all
of these if they are healthy looking
they go in the compost if they are not
if they've started to spot or brown I go
ahead and just throw them in the burn
pile if you do decide to root your
suckers to try to create clones to have
extra plants make sure that you only use
really healthy clippings you wouldn't
want to cut down a bottom sucker that's
already starting to show spot because
that's not going to create a healthy
plant so if you've got a really healthy
clipping just like this one you can go
ahead and route it and make a clone
plant it as another plant again here's
another really established plant if you
want to see me go ahead and prune it
from the beginning I'm going to cut off
anything that slowed down to the bottom
or that may be touching the ground
these are our very established suckers
here I'm gonna go ahead and cut those
off same thing here on the other side
again I'm not rooting these because I
already have hundreds of tomato plants I
don't need any more but you could now in
the case of this tomato plant you can
see that this sucker has got itself
pretty established but I am gonna go
ahead and cut that guy off and trim this
plant down to this one main stalk now
here are two suckers that I just pulled
off of these plants this one is the one
that was a lot larger and you might
think that this would be a better option
to use as a clone to go ahead and
reroute for a second plant but actually
it's better to use the smaller ones you
can give it a try with the larger
suckers however this this sucker already
had started to set flowers and it's just
more plant to support essentially it has
no root system it's got a grow a root
system and trying to grow a root system
for a larger amount of plant is harder
and then growing a root system for a
smaller one so if you're trying to go
ahead and make some clones off your
suckers when you're pruning go ahead and
use the smaller the smaller suckers they
just they route easier they transplant
easier it's it's really the better way
to go you may have also heard a term at
some point called topping like topping
your tomato plants now remember I was
talking about in determinants and how
they just keep growing and growing and
growing as long as you provide them
support and keep them healthy that's
true unless you cut the top off of them
they grow from the top this is where
they develop new leaves and basically if
you were to top your tomato plant it's
just coming and snipping that top part
off
limits this plant's ability to grow any
taller now I'm telling you this to make
sure when you are pruning your plants
prune from the bottom up and leave the
top alone you don't want to make any
mistakes and accidentally lock the top
off of your indeterminate tomatoes
because then you're gonna be really sad
whenever it stops growing and stops
producing fruit the time that you want
to top your Tomatoes is one when they
get too tall for the supports that
you're willing to get them I have my own
determinate tomatoes growing on these
cattle panels which are raised about 20
to 24 inches up above the ground which
means I'm offering about 6 feet of
support and they can grow about 2 feet
higher than that before the wind begins
to knock them around and branches are in
risk of breaking and so when mine get
that tall usually it's getting it's
getting close to the end of us having
plants at that point anyway it's really
hot here so I don't get to grow them all
the way through the summer at that point
I can go and just snip the top off my
plant and what it's going to do at that
point it's going to cause that plant to
focus on ripening the fruit that it's
already set instead of growing more
branches setting more flowers and
attempting to produce more fruit another
reason why you would want to go ahead
and top your plants it other than
running out of space is running out of
time like if you live in a northern
region and let's say it's three weeks
four weeks to your last frost date you
don't want that plant continuing to try
to set new fruit that it won't have time
before the frost comes to ripen so a lot
of times what people will do in those
regions is they'll go top off all their
plants so the plants can then focus on
ripening the fruit that's already been
set instead of worrying about trying to
set more one more thing to discuss in
regards to pruning is blossoms now my
plants have been in the ground for long
enough that I feel comfortable with them
setting blossoms even though some of
them are kind of puny like this little
guy when I first put them in the ground
whenever they are in pot still or when
they're very first transplanted within
that first week or so a lot of times I
will come pinch the first set of
blossoms that the plant produces and
pinching blossoms may seem
counterintuitive to trying to grow free
however we we get better harvests with
overall healthier plants and healthier
root systems so when you first put your
plants in the ground if they're trying
to set fruit at that point they're not
going to be focusing on growing their
root too deep so pinching off those
first sets of blossoms a lot of times
lends to a better harvest in the long
run because it lends to a better root
system now some of my plants are still
on the smaller side but they're going to
grow really fast especially with this
proper pruning they have good root
systems I planted them deep when I
planted them so at this point I am NOT
pinching any blossoms unless unless I
see blossoms like this this is called a
Phase II ated blossom or a fuse blossom
and this one's actually not awful but
you can see here that this is a like a
massive blossom that has multiple
flowers that are fused together it's
really big and I pull these off have you
ever seen those big funky deformed
looking heirloom tomatoes that have all
of these crevices and cracks and chunks
where it looks like kind of conjoined
twins or triplets this is that in its
infancy fused blossoms or face eiated
blossoms is where multiple blossoms
essentially are growing together in one
and what this is going to produce is
really deformed fruit that's not always
a bad thing honestly I think it's pretty
cool sometimes you get these massive
funky heirloom tomatoes and it is kind
of cool but unfortunately sometimes
whenever they're really cat-faced like
that that's what that's called this cat
facing there are big parts that don't
form right they end up rotten so really
if you want more uniform fruit that's
maybe more usable you can just pinch off
the big face eiated blossoms when you
come across it if you're not sure if you
think maybe that's just a big blossom
just to leave it it's not that big a
deal if you get a little bit of a deform
tomato it's kind of the fun of heirlooms
but sometimes you'll see these massive
flowers that are that are clusters of
like six or seven blossoms just all
fused together and chances are really
really good that what that's going to do
is just really draw on that play
to ripen and produce that massive fruit
and chances are good is not even going
to be that usable for you so I always
keep an eye out for big face eiated
blossoms and go ahead and prune those
off here's another example of a face
eiated blossom that's kind of coming in
you can really see clearly that this is
two flowers that's fused together and so
if this produced a tomato it would it
would look like two Tomatoes fused
together so I'm going to take that guy
off one more thing to keep in mind if
you have a day of tomato pruning and
ahead of you is that tomato plants have
a substance on their branches called
tomato tar and if you spend an extended
period of time
handling a lot of plants if you're
pruning and you're touching the plants a
good deal okay you'll end up with this
black substance on your fingers that is
really tacky it's kind of greenish black
and it's a really really difficult to
wash off and in and of itself it's
harmless except for it's just gonna make
you look dirty whenever you get out to
the grocery store so if you want to get
that off your fingers some acid works
well just some sort of acid like vinegar
washing your hands with a little bit of
white vinegar and rubbing it it will
stain your kitchen towels so just be
aware of that what you wipe it off on
however that substance does have a
benefit of having really intense tomato
flavor so actually when you're pruning
if you want to save a few of your little
discarded tomato branches and leaves you
can throw these in your soup pot or in
your sauce and they will lend a really
great tomato a flavor to whatever dish
that you're cooking just make sure you
strain them out because I don't know
that the leaves themselves are gonna
have the taste and texture that you're
looking for thank you guys so much I do
have a couple more videos out about
growing tomatoes about how to plant them
and some tips and growing them I will
link both of those videos below thank
you so much for watching I bless you
until next time
you